README.md, before:

# Edegal - A web picture gallery

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/japsu/edegal-express.png)](https://travis-ci.org/japsu/edegal-express)

Edegal is a web picture gallery written in Node.js and designed with performance and scalability in mind.

High performance is achieved through the usage of a dead simple REST JSON API in which most cache misses only result in a single database query that returns a single document.

Edegal is a work in progress. See a demo at [uusi.kuvat.aniki.fi](http://uusi.kuvat.aniki.fi/).

## Goals

* Successfully replace Coppermine Image Gallery at [kuvat.aniki.fi](http://kuvat.aniki.fi)
  * 49,860 files in 619 albums and 110 categories viewed 6,118,935 times over the course of 9 years (as of 22nd June 2013)
* Drop some jaws with stunning visuals and flawless usability
* Become the number one choice for a self-hosted image gallery for serious hobbyist photographers

## Getting started

Assuming you have MongoDB installed. If you need to authenticate to MongoDB, edit `server/db.coffee` (look for `new Mongolian`, change url to `mongo://user:password@localhost/edegal`).

    # install imagemagick
    sudo apt-get install imagemagick

    # install node.js (may skip if node -v returns something >= 0.8 already)
    git clone https://github.com/creationix/nvm ~/.nvm
    source ~/.nvm/nvm.sh
    nvm install v0.10.12

    # install dependencies and build
    npm install

    # (NODE v0.8 ONLY: if you are running node v0.8 and not v0.10, npm install won't run prepublish for you)
    npm run-script prepublish

    # run server
    npm start

    # enjoy
    iexplore http://localhost:3000

Development:

    # install development tools into PATH
    npm -g install bower coffee-script james

    # do an un-minified debug build
    james

    # watch files for changes and rebuild when necessary
    james watch

    # run tests
    npm test

## Getting pictures into the gallery

Sorry, this is a bit technical at the moment. There will be a browser-based uploader. Some day. I think.

At this moment you need to import album at a time. First, put the pictures somewhere under the document root. Let's assume `public/pictures/my-new-album`.

    # (If you havent yet created the root album - do this only once)
    coffee scripts/create_empty_album.coffee --title "My Photo Gallery"

    # Tell Edegal about the new photos (--directory relative to --root)
    coffee scripts/import_filesystem.coffee --title "My New Album" --parent / --directory pictures/my-new-album

    # Create thumbnails and previews. -s is short for --size.
    coffee scripts/create_previews.coffee -s 900x240@40 -s 1200x600@85

    # Set album thumbnails from the newly created ones.
    coffee scripts/rehash_thumbnails.coffee

You're all set!

## Technology choices

* Development tools
  * [Node.js](https://github.com/joyent/node)
  * [James](https://github.com/leonidas/james.js)
  * [Browserify](https://github.com/substack/node-browserify)
  * [CoffeeScript](https://github.com/jashkenas/coffee-script)
  * [Jade](https://github.com/visionmedia/jade) templates for static HTML
  * [Stylus](https://github.com/learnboost/stylus)
  * [UglifyJS](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2)
  * [Mocha](https://github.com/visionmedia/mocha)
  * [Sinon](https://github.com/cjohansen/Sinon.JS)
* Backend
  * [Node.js](https://github.com/joyent/node)
  * [Express](https://github.com/visionmedia/express)
  * [Mongolian DeadBeef](https://github.com/marcello3d/node-mongolian)
  * [MongoDB](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo)
  * [nginx](https://github.com/nginx/nginx)
* Frontend
  * [Backbone](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone)
  * [Backbone.Relational](https://github.com/PaulUithol/Backbone-relational)
  * [Transparency](https://github.com/leonidas/transparency)
  * [Hammer.js](https://github.com/EightMedia/hammer.js)

## Testimonials

* "That's mighty fast!"
* "I don't remember having ever run into another web gallery as nifty as this!"
* "I find the page load speed of Edegal incredible. But I think I've just grown accustomed to bad galleries."

Commit message:

README: Add a hint about thumbnails being 240px high

README.md, after:

# Edegal - A web picture gallery

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/japsu/edegal-express.png)](https://travis-ci.org/japsu/edegal-express)

Edegal is a web picture gallery written in Node.js and designed with performance and scalability in mind.

High performance is achieved through the usage of a dead simple REST JSON API in which most cache misses only result in a single database query that returns a single document.

Edegal is a work in progress. See a demo at [uusi.kuvat.aniki.fi](http://uusi.kuvat.aniki.fi/).

## Goals

* Successfully replace Coppermine Image Gallery at [kuvat.aniki.fi](http://kuvat.aniki.fi)
  * 49,860 files in 619 albums and 110 categories viewed 6,118,935 times over the course of 9 years (as of 22nd June 2013)
* Drop some jaws with stunning visuals and flawless usability
* Become the number one choice for a self-hosted image gallery for serious hobbyist photographers

## Getting started

Assuming you have MongoDB installed. If you need to authenticate to MongoDB, edit `server/db.coffee` (look for `new Mongolian`, change url to `mongo://user:password@localhost/edegal`).

    # install imagemagick
    sudo apt-get install imagemagick

    # install node.js (may skip if node -v returns something >= 0.8 already)
    git clone https://github.com/creationix/nvm ~/.nvm
    source ~/.nvm/nvm.sh
    nvm install v0.10.12

    # install dependencies and build
    npm install

    # (NODE v0.8 ONLY: if you are running node v0.8 and not v0.10, npm install won't run prepublish for you)
    npm run-script prepublish

    # run server
    npm start

    # enjoy
    iexplore http://localhost:3000

Development:

    # install development tools into PATH
    npm -g install bower coffee-script james

    # do an un-minified debug build
    james

    # watch files for changes and rebuild when necessary
    james watch

    # run tests
    npm test

## Getting pictures into the gallery

Sorry, this is a bit technical at the moment. There will be a browser-based uploader. Some day. I think.

At this moment you need to import album at a time. First, put the pictures somewhere under the document root. Let's assume `public/pictures/my-new-album`.

    # (If you havent yet created the root album - do this only once)
    coffee scripts/create_empty_album.coffee --title "My Photo Gallery"

    # Tell Edegal about the new photos (--directory relative to --root)
    coffee scripts/import_filesystem.coffee --title "My New Album" --parent / --directory pictures/my-new-album

    # Create thumbnails and previews. -s is short for --size, which specifies the bounding box.
    # That is, previews will end up smaller in either dimension most of the time.
    # Hint: Thumbnails are 240 pixels high. You should at least generate 240 high previews.
    coffee scripts/create_previews.coffee -s 900x240@40 -s 1200x600@85

    # Set album thumbnails from the newly created ones.
    coffee scripts/rehash_thumbnails.coffee

You're all set!

## Technology choices

* Development tools
  * [Node.js](https://github.com/joyent/node)
  * [James](https://github.com/leonidas/james.js)
  * [Browserify](https://github.com/substack/node-browserify)
  * [CoffeeScript](https://github.com/jashkenas/coffee-script)
  * [Jade](https://github.com/visionmedia/jade) templates for static HTML
  * [Stylus](https://github.com/learnboost/stylus)
  * [UglifyJS](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2)
  * [Mocha](https://github.com/visionmedia/mocha)
  * [Sinon](https://github.com/cjohansen/Sinon.JS)
* Backend
  * [Node.js](https://github.com/joyent/node)
  * [Express](https://github.com/visionmedia/express)
  * [Mongolian DeadBeef](https://github.com/marcello3d/node-mongolian)
  * [MongoDB](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo)
  * [nginx](https://github.com/nginx/nginx)
* Frontend
  * [Backbone](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone)
  * [Backbone.Relational](https://github.com/PaulUithol/Backbone-relational)
  * [Transparency](https://github.com/leonidas/transparency)
  * [Hammer.js](https://github.com/EightMedia/hammer.js)

## Testimonials

* "That's mighty fast!"
* "I don't remember having ever run into another web gallery as nifty as this!"
* "I find the page load speed of Edegal incredible. But I think I've just grown accustomed to bad galleries."
